So, we're going to start.
So Martin here is going to tell us some stuff about Apple.
And I have to confess, I'm very anti-Apple, so I wanted to actually refuse this talk,
so that everybody will, again, refuse this talk.
So, Martin, take it.
Thank you very much.
So good morning, everyone.
Thank you.
Thank you for providing me with the opportunity to speak here.
My name is Martin DeVos, and today I will present to you my hobby project, which involves
an open-source emulator of legacy Apple devices.
And in this talk, I will explain how I managed to emulate these kinds of devices, what it
takes, what the challenges are, and what the next steps are.
So let me first briefly introduce myself.
So I'm a postdoctoral researcher at EPFL in Switzerland.
And my main research topic is not actually on emulation or reverse engineering, but it's
on distributed machine learning systems, like many people are working on nowadays, like
LLMs and stuff.
But I'm also a very big enthusiast of reverse engineering.
And I actually started doing this during my master thesis already.
And during my PhD, I worked on reverse engineering some mobile applications of banking apps
in the Netherlands and other countries as well.
And that has resulted in, well, my first paper of my PhD.
And, yeah, and two years ago, I decided to pick up this project.
I was inspired by reading a blog post of someone that managed to emulate an iPhone in software.
And that's how I was motivated to work on this project.
And this was actually Jonathan Effek.
And I think he was one of the first that managed to boot iOS, the operating system of iPhones
and other Apple devices, with QMU, which is a very popular open-source emulator.
And he managed to boot it to an interactive Bash shell.
So he managed to boot this emulator to user land, which is quite an achievement.
And I thought, well, I want to learn how that works.
It involves some reverse engineering, which is a thing I really like.
I like seeing how software works, trying to decipher some of the secrets in the software.
And it would also contribute eventually to long-term hardware preservation, because
when people would run it, it has some feeling of nostalgia.
And, well, I mean, I had my first Apple device, was an Apple Touch, and I decided to, well, work on that.
So after reading the blog post, I was a bit puzzled.
And I was like, OK, where do I start?
How can I set up my own project to work on this kind of stuff?
And, you know, Apple has released many different devices over time.
And the first question I had to answer is, which device am I going to emulate?
And if you think about contemporary devices, they are incredibly hard to emulate,
at least emulating all the aspects of these devices is a very, very challenging and difficult task.
They contain neural engines.
They have phase ID touch IDs, which also has interactions with secure enclaves,
but also software-based security measures like trust caches,
which is a mechanism that's by Apple that only allows particular applications to have privileges.
So I was thinking, if I go back in time and I take one of the first devices by Apple,
at least in the Apple Touch family, that should be somewhat, well, easy to emulate.
It is a device that was released in 2007, and it doesn't contain, well,
the complicated hardware peripherals that I just mentioned.
And, yeah, hopefully that will be simple enough to emulate,
well, which were some famous last words, because even these devices are very, very complicated,
as I will outline a bit later in this talk as well.
So I'm definitely not the first one to work on this kind of emulation.
So there are some related projects.
One of the, I think the earliest attempt actually on emulating the SOC of an iPhone was by a CMW.me,
who actually is the founder of Corellium, which you might know as a company that provides
virtualization services, both of iPhone and Android applications.
Yeah, we had the blog post that I just mentioned, which enforced the emulation of an iPhone 6S Plus.
And that work was picked up by someone else and eventually involved in an iPhone 11 emulator.
And there's also OpenEyeBoots, which is an open source bootloader for early generation Apple devices.
And all of these projects have been extremely helpful in understanding and connecting all the different pieces together,
because without them I wouldn't have been able to get this far.
So then I had to pick a framework for emulation.
And QMU is one of the most popular open source frameworks for this kind of emulation.
It provides support for hardware emulation.
You can define your peripherals, your hardware components.
You can implement their expected behavior.
And it already comes pre-shipped with support for many different protocols,
like the USB protocol, network interfaces, SPI, SQC, SDAO, etc.
So that was all very nice, but unfortunately it has a very, very steep learning curve.
So it's quite difficult to wrap your head around particular parts of the project.
So most of the time I had to rely on existing emulations provided by QMU to see how that works.
And when doing emulation, you also need a way, or you would like to have a way of debugging your software,
because you want to see which code path execution is being followed,
what the register values are, and what's generally happening in the system.
So the nice thing about QMU is that it automatically provides a GDB stop, a GDB server,
that I can directly connect to, and then I can step through the code,
I can jump to functions, and I can inspect all the register values.
And for the reverse engineering part, I've been using Gidra, if I pronounce that correctly.
It is a very popular open source tool for reverse engineering and decomposition,
and this assembly of binaries, and this has been also tremendously helpful.
So here on the right you can see, for example, some code related to the start procedure of the SPI controller,
which controls the SPI interface.
And if you look at it, it's actually pretty readable.
You can do a lot with this stuff, but also the way Apple has engineered our software is very predictable.
So they're using the IOCAD framework, which is very similar in structure.
I mean, most of the peripherals look like this.
You initialize some memory, you set some variables, and that's mostly it.
So now let's talk a bit more about the emulation itself.
So my philosophy when it comes to emulation is that I wanted to stay very close to the actual hardware,
to what's actually happening on the hardware, no matter how difficult that might be.
What I noticed is that many existing emulators, they cut corners, which is not unsurprising, right?
Because for example, if you run into some kind of signature check,
it might take a lot of time to get everything working and to get the right functionality
and to make sure that pass steps.
So one way is, for example, to just patch out that particular procedure or function call.
Why do I want to do this?
Because I had a feeling that any hack, any workaround I would do in the very early stages
of working on this emulator would bite me back later.
So I'd rather do it right very early in the bootpress process,
where things might not be as involved as when dealing with a more high level of a user land or application.
So I tried to, well, get it right the first try.
Well, but as expected, it still ended up with a bunch of hacks, patches, works around,
and patched out binaries, because for some things I really, really couldn't wrap my head around,
at least not within a reasonable amount of time.
So another philosophy that I had, I started with following the bootshank.
So I started with the lowest level components in here, which is the Securon Bootrom.
This is the very first piece of code that runs on an Apple device.
It is actually fused into the chip of any device.
If you find vulnerability in there, it's very nice, because you cannot patch that out.
That's actually something that happened a few years ago.
The Securon loots another called low level bootloader, LLB.
That in turn loads the main bootloader, iBoot.
Then that's iBoot, the component loads the X and U kernel.
When the kernel has launched, it will start the launch D process,
which is the very first process that runs on the system.
That's launched Springboard, which is responsible for drawing the iconic user interface
with the app icons and the hope screen.
Springboard in turn starts all the different apps,
like the Alarms, Safari, and other applications that you are familiar with.
So I started working on the Bootrom first.
As a very first step, I had to get the Bootrom, which is fortunately provided online.
So that's very nice.
It was dumped.
The main responsibility of the Bootloader is not only to load the other bootloader,
the low level bootloader, but also to initialize some key peripherals,
like a clock, the timer, and the USB stack.
Because even if everything else on the device fails,
the Bootrom allows you to restore the device using some USB protocol.
So if something goes wrong, you can use DFU, DFU mode to restore,
to refresh your device.
Now, I had some instructions running there,
but I very quickly found out that when emulating this binary, this Bootrom,
that it jumps to some unknown memory locations.
And that was a bit problematic, because I didn't really know where it jumped to.
And I looked a bit on the internet and I asked around.
And it looks like this first generation iPhone
is using some proprietary logic by Samsung.
So very early generations of Apple devices were made in collaboration with Samsung.
So the Bootrom was also made by Samsung.
And I didn't really have any idea of what happens,
because the Bootrom is very obfuscated and very small,
and there are almost no strings and no contacts to work with.
And I also didn't have any physical iPhone,
Apple Touch device at that time.
So I couldn't really figure out or dump that part of memory.
And the same actually goes for the low-level Bootloader.
I was running into the same problem there.
It jumped to some unknown memory locations,
so I decided to skip these two parts and go straight to iBoot.
Yes, and this is how I load iBoot in code.
So iBoot is the main Bootloader.
It is responsible for loading the kernel from basically the hard disk.
I was very fortunate that the source code of iBoot got leaked in 2018.
So that actually was a newer version of iBoot,
but at least it gave me some idea of how this all works.
So I really tried hard to map all different components
in the leaked source code with what I see in Gidra in the binaries.
And I managed to boot iBoot and get all the peripherals up and running
that iBoot expects.
One thing about that is that there is this device tree,
which you might also be familiar with if you work with Linux,
some low-level Linux.
It is basically a big dictionary of all the peripherals and their properties.
It is included in the IPSW file,
which is like the firmware file that you can download from Apple,
and that is being installed.
It is populated by iBoot.
So iBoot, for example, gets the MAC address of the Wi-Fi driver
and then it injects this number in the device tree.
So here on the right, you can see a part of the device tree
containing some information about the crypto AES engine.
So it contains some identifiers and some other things.
That was also dumped.
So I also used that as reference to get an idea
about which peripherals there are to emulate.
And I can tell you that these devices are extremely complicated.
So this is a diagram that I made of all the components
that I managed to get up and running.
Not all of them are fully functional,
but most of them at least have some functionality.
And this is for the Apple Touch 2G,
which is slightly more complicated
than the first-generation Apple Touch.
So these peripherals, most of the peripherals,
you can talk to them through something called memory map I.O.
So in the memory map, there is a small part
that is allocated to a particular peripheral.
So here on the right, you can see the addresses
of all these peripherals,
which I also mostly got from the device tree.
And you can write to these memory locations
to talk to your hardware devices.
And then the main challenge becomes, of course,
like to talk with these hardware devices.
And you have to do that in such a way
that you get the expected responses
and that the kernel and the other parts of the boot stage
are happy with what these peripherals are saying.
So this is an example how you can initialize
the hardware components in QMU.
You define some methods, some initialization methods,
and then you include them in some main file.
I won't spend too much time on this now.
This is how you implement the functionality
of each hardware component.
You create a read method and a write method.
The read method is called when something,
a hardware address associated with the peripheral is read
and the write function is called
when you write to a register.
And you can see, for example, in the read method
that you have a switch,
so you look at which address am I reading something from
and then you return the write response.
And sometimes that can be very arbitrary.
I mean, I haven't deciphered all the meanings
of all registers and what they expect,
but you can at least do a best effort attempt
in returning the values that makes the kernel happy.
And this can become complicated very quickly.
So here you can see a part of the SPI controller,
which was a particularly difficult component
because Apple has some, well, weird things sometimes.
They make some modifications to their hardware,
which not always follow well-established
hardware protocols to say.
And finally, you attach the peripheral
to the overall machine in QMU.
And you, so, and you optionally, you can connect the IRQ
like the interrupt request.
So interrupts are also functional there.
Again, I won't spend too much time on this now.
So after iBoot was running, I had to load the kernel
and the kernel uses iOkit
and it starts all the device,
all the device drivers that are declared in the device tree.
So whereas the low-level bootloader in iBoot
would only load the most important peripherals,
this would start all the peripherals.
And here on the right, you can see some of the peripherals
that I reverse engineered with the Ghidra.
You can see LCD display, the power management unit,
some other functionality that I didn't even know
that were part of the Apple Touch itself.
And this mostly follows a very similar protocol.
When you start a peripheral, you usually execute
some reset procedure or you do like an inter,
you wait for interrupt or something
to indicate that the device is ready.
And after all these devices are loaded,
then you start launch D.
And this is the part where I spend most time on
because I had to like get past all these peripherals.
I had to understand how they work.
And the further you get into the bootchain,
the more complicated things become
because then you are really building on,
on the correct functionality of say the clock
and the timer and interrupt requests, et cetera.
So roughly 20 peripherals later,
I got most of the things functional,
like the clock, timer, the interrupt controllers,
they're all fully functional.
I'm pretty sure there are a few bugs left,
but nothing too major.
And only partial support for some of the more
involved peripherals, just enough to make it
past initialization.
And then we're talking about peripherals like TV out,
which happens that if you connect your Apple Touch
to a TV, the GPU, also the accelerometer,
the light sensors, they're not really important
at this point.
I was very fortunate that I could avoid GPU rendering,
hardware GPU rendering with a flag.
So the GPU rendering in this emulator
happens fully in software, which is slower,
but still it's reasonable enough to use the
Apple Touch itself.
So there's a lot of work to do,
but at least at this point I managed to boot to userlens.
To give you one more interesting challenge,
was the persistence layer.
So the Apple Touch contains two types of memory,
some more memory that contains small binaries.
I think it's at most a few megabytes.
And you also have the NAND memory, which is like
eight gigabytes, and you can store all your applications
and the operating system in there.
There are some key difference between the layout
of these, of NAND and NAND.
So I had to spend a lot of time on when I emulated
the Apple Touch 2G to make sure that also works.
The main problem here is that once the kernel
gets some kind of block, let's say block five,
it uses logical block addressing.
And that doesn't match with what's how the NAND layout
underneath works.
So I had to really figure out
how something is mapped from a logical block level
to the physical block level.
And that took a lot of time.
I ended up with some scripts in a separate repository
that takes a dmg file and that converts it
to like a raw file system, a file system as it is
like really in the hardware.
This is the diagram for that to give you some more context.
This is for the NAND.
So we have the file system which is implemented in the kernel
and that's if it wants to get something
from the operating system, it uses a logical block address
that goes through two different layers,
the flash translation layer and the virtual flash layer,
again with their own numbering and addressing and mappings.
And that results eventually in some physical page number
and a CE which is basically like a bank,
a number between one and eight.
I think in the interest of time I'm going to skip this
but I just want to say that multi-touch,
even though it looks very simple,
how hard can it be to convert a touch on a screen
from to an X and Y coordinate was very, very complicated
to get right and for this I actually,
for this I actually needed a real device.
So most of the things I could do without having
an actual device but for this I needed a real device
because I had to play with touches
and see how the encoding of the touch works.
So here on the right you can see,
well me playing around so you do press a button
and then I recorded what the multi-touch driver
gives back to me.
So all in all I managed, when doing all of this,
I managed to boot to the, I will touch one G
to the home screen.
Well you can see it's a pretty basic home screen,
not many applications.
I think I got this running about one and a half year ago
and a few months ago I managed to get the Apple Touch 2G
working as well running iOS 2.1.1
and the Apple Touch 1G is running iPhone OS 1.0.
And that mostly concludes my presentation.
I open sourced all the code,
I created this GitHub project out of it
which is a fork of the QEMU project.
I'm not sure if I want to upstream it
because it has a lot of ugly code
and a lot of well, work arounds.
But contributions are very welcome.
It currently has support for the Apple Touch 1G and 2G
and I'm currently focusing on getting
the Apple Touch 2G stable so I can get an app store
and third party applications up and running.
So that's all, thank you.
And if you want to know more, I have some blog posts
with more technical details on my personal website.
APPLAUSE
Right, hello.
Yeah, so we have some sign for questions.
I hope the people ask questions are here in the front
because I don't want to run to the back.
But I'm going to start with a question
because you mentioned Corellium, which is awesome by the way,
they are very expensive but they are awesome,
but Apple suites them into oblivion and they are lost,
which I'm very proud of.
It has nothing to do with it.
But so the question is, has Apple made any friendly inquiries?
No, no, no.
I think this project is still too insignificant for Apple
to care about.
I also know about the Rockbox, for example, which
does Ipod generation emulation.
I'm not sure.
I don't think they've been sued.
But I'm not that worried about it right now.
OK, excellent.
Questions?
Sorry, come to the side.
Hi, thank you very much for your speaking.
Only one simple question.
Because why you choose the iPod Touch and the iPhone
platform, it's only a simpler problem,
or because there are patents or other problems in that way.
Thank you very much.
Yes, thank you.
So the question is, why did I choose for the iPhone
and not for the iPod Touch and not for the iPhone?
Well, I mean, when I started this project,
I was not familiar with the architecture of both.
But I was thinking, well, the iPod Touch contains at least
one less peripheral, namely the baseband, the modem baseband.
And I was not sure how critical that
would be for the entire booting procedure.
So that was, I think, my main motivation.
But most of this stuff can also be applied to the iPhone.
I think with some changes, you can get the iPhone 2G working.
Because the iPhone 2G is architecturally similar
to the iPod Touch 1G.
Yeah.
Hi, great talk.
What are your future plans for this project?
Do you want to support newer devices
or expand like the computer in a more modern iOS version?
Yeah, thank you for your question.
So what are my future plans?
I am currently working on getting the USB up and running.
There is an independent researcher
that also managed to get a syscalls between the guest
and the host running.
So that's pretty cool.
So we can do some syscalls.
So I'm currently working on USB.
Whether I want to work on newer generations,
I'm not so sure.
I think it will be possible to emulate them.
But I think having one stable and, well,
actively used emulator is better than having
10 fragmented, half supported emulators.
Because there are like many Apple devices out there.
So yeah.
OK.
Hi, thank you for this great talk.
I was wondering, you were talking
about getting the app store up and running.
Have you considered getting in touch with Jay Freeman,
the author of Cydia?
Cydia, no, I haven't considered getting in touch with him.
I know some people are asking me about,
can we jailbreak and then install Cydia?
I think we probably can.
But there's almost no tooling around this emulator
at the moment.
So getting these jailbreaks up and running
is kind of difficult right now.
But I think it's a good suggestion.
I think at one point I should.
Yes.
Thank you.
Anybody at the front, hopefully?
Hi.
And thank you for your talk.
I don't remember in 2007 with this type of device,
required activation behind us or not?
I think they indeed require activation.
Oh, actually, that's a good point.
I used activation tokens from an actual device.
Because I also had to match the serial number, et cetera.
So I matched the serial number.
I used activation tokens from an actual device.
And then it worked.
But I could have well patched out all the look down the demon.
It's the look down the is a demon responsible for this checking
if everything is activated, et cetera.
I could have well patched that out.
OK.
Thank you.
Great talk.
Have you got the opportunity to play with JTAG debugging
to cross check if your emulator works well,
like a real device?
What are you referring to?
Like how can you do this check?
I would say you try to execute some peripheral access,
both on the real device and in your emulator.
And you cross check the read results.
The spell is a good point.
I think you could do it with open iBooks.
So I managed to install open iBooks on the actual device.
There you can play around with the peripherals.
So I think you can have some kind of trace where you just
fire requests to the hardware.
And you get some responses.
And you can cross check that indeed with what I get.
No, I haven't done that yet.
But I think that's an excellent idea
to make sure that your emulator is mostly
compatible or the same as your real device.
So I had a small question, actually,
because at the beginning you mentioned you're a postdoc.
So how much time do you spend on this?
It's very difficult to say.
Because sometimes I have a week and I spend every evening on it.
Sometimes I don't spend any time on it for three weeks.
I mean, it also depends on my main schedule for my work.
I mean, depends on paper deadlines as postdocs, obviously.
Yeah, I think when you get closer to getting something up
and running, you tend to be more motivated.
And then I spend more time on it than when you're completely
stuck.
And yeah.
OK, does anybody have a question?
I can keep going on.
So another small question is, because one of the previous
talks, they mentioned motivation.
How do you get motivation to start something like this?
And where do you start?
So can you tell us something about that?
Yeah, I think for this, well, you mean,
first of all, you need some curiosity.
You want to know how things work.
And you really want to, yeah, you
have to be able to dig deep into some components.
And you know, there are many components.
So you will inevitably run into something
that you don't know anything about.
So I learned a lot about all the different components
that are in there.
But another very important thing, I think, is persistence.
Because at many times, for example,
when working on the multi-tarch or the nonce,
I was like, yeah, I really don't know how this works.
And then you solve a small part.
And then it turns out there's yet another layer
of indirection going on.
And you have to figure that out again.
And then it turns out that something you did earlier
was you made the wrong assumption,
which breaks all other components further in the pipeline.